MACHINE CODE

Processors execute machine code.
Machine code consists of instructions in binary stored in a memory location.

The first part of the binary number is the opcode and the second part is the operand.

OPCODE
- represents the operation the processor should carry out (e.g. load, add, store)

OPERANDS
- represents data that the operation should be carried out on. 
It may reference a register in the CPU, a memory location in RAM, or a literal data
value (e.g. 0b1010 = ten)

Machine code is the lowest level of code that can be programmed externally.


ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE

This is a slight abstraction from machine code.
However, there is still a one-to-one mapping with the instructions being executed by
the processor. 

Both machine code & assembly language are considered to be low level languages.

The opcode is written as a mnemonic - a short easy to read string. The operand is 
written in decimal or hex.

A translator (known as an assembler) converts the program in assembly language to
machine code.


EARLY COMPUTERS

ENIAC (completed in 1945) was the first programmable, general purpose digital
computer.

Machine code values were entered by manually setting switches. This was difficult,
time consuming, and error prone.

By 1949, starting with the EDSAC computer, programmers were starting to use assembly.

Instructions and data were often stored and entered using punched cards

In the 1950's, high level programming languages like FORTRAN started to be used.
Punch cards were replaced by keyboards, and magnetic tape was used for storage.


HIGH LEVEL LANGUAGES
All programming languages apart from machine code & assembly are high level
languages.

This includes Python, C, C++, C#, Java, JavaScript, Rust, etc.

The HLL must be converted to machine code by a translator (compiler or interpreter.)

TYPES
    IMPERATIVE LANGUAGES
        - languages where the program is a sequence of instructions that
          are followed in order. Instructions can change the state of the program.
        - e.g. python/C++

    DECLARATIVE LANGUAGES
        - languages what the program should do is stated, rather than how to do it.
        - e.g. SQL.

ADVANTAGES
    - Program code is easier to understand, maintain, and debug
    - It is fast to develop (one line of high level code can do the same job as lots of lines
      of assembly)
    - It facilitates collaborative working as developers can work on different
      modules / subroutines
    - Programs are machine independent and so can be ported to other hardware
      platforms.
    - Flow control structures such as loops and selection are available
    - There is built-in support for data structures such as arrays and records.
    - The language can be problem-oriented / tailored to a specific domain such as R
      for statistics or MATLAB for engineering
    - There is support for different paradigms such as OOP or Functional Programming
    - There are features to support modularity and code reuse such as subroutines &
      classes.
    - There are libraries of pre-defined functions that can be used for common tasks
      such as writing to files.


LOW LEVEL LANGUAGES

ADVANTAGES
    It may use fewer instructions than machine code produced by a translator
    converting high level code.

    It may allow better access to hardware, registers, and low
    level operating system routines.

    It may allow better access to hardware, registers, and operating system routines.

    IT will allow more control over the final machine code that is executed.

    It will also be necessary to use a low level language if a translator for a high
    level language is not available for the hardware that the program will run on.

    May be used in embedded systems, device drivers, and interrupt handlers.
